RETROSHEET: HOW TO USE OUR EVENT FILES


The ".zip" file archives you can download contain several files
that can be expanded and written to your hard disk using the
program PKUNZIP.EXE, which is available for downloading under
the Tools selection.  Several other programs can expand and
manage .zip files.  The game data archives contain event files,
roster files for the league, and a team names and abbreviations
file.  All files are standard ASCII text files.
  
In the team archive files there is an event file that contains
all of the team's games for the season. These files have an
.EVX extension.  For example, for the 1983 Yankees, this file is
named 83NYA.EVX. The league archive files contain the home game
event files for each team, which have an .EVA extension for AL
teams and an .EVN extension for NL teams. The 1983 Yankees home
games file is named 83NYA.EVA for example. The files are standard
ASCII text files and in each file the games are in chronological
order.  
  
For each game there are eight different record types.  Each  
record type has a unique designator, which is followed by several 
fields separated by commas.  The eight record types and their  
possible fields are described below.  There are two other record
types not described here which are used to indicate a batter or pitcher
batting or throwing other than his normal handedness.  
  
ID   Each game begins with a twelve character ID record which identifies 
     the date, location, and number of the game.  For example,
     BAL198304040 should be read as follows.  The first three characters
     identify the home team (the Orioles).  The next two are the last two
     digits of the year (1983).  The next two are the month (April), the
     next two are the day (04).  The last digit is the number of the
     game: here it is a 0 for a single game; it would be 1 for the
     first game of a double header, 2 for the second game.  
  
version   The version statement is next and tracks when the file  
          was created.  The current version is '1'.
  
info      There are up to 30 info records, each of which contains a  
          single piece of information, such as the temperature,  
          the attendance, the identity of each umpire, etc.  
  
start     There are 18 (for the NL or pre-DH AL) or 20 (for the  
          AL with the DH) start records, which identify the  
          starting lineups for the game.  Each start record has  
          five fields.   
  
       1. The first field is the Retrosheet ID code,  
          which is unique for each player.  This 8 digit code is  
          constructed from the first four letters of the player's 
          last name, the first initial of his common name, and a  
          three digit number.
  
       2. The second field is the player's name.  
  
       3. The next field is either 0 (for visiting team), or 1  
          (for home team).  
  
       4. The next field is the position in the batting order.  
  
       5. The last field is the starting fielding position.  The  
          numbers are the standard notation, with designated  
          hitters being identified as position 10.  
  
play      The play records contain the events of the game.  Each  
          play record has 7 fields.  
  
       1. The first field is the inning.  
  
       2. The second field is either 0 (for visiting team) or 1  
          (for home team).  
  
       3. The third field is the Retrosheet ID code.  
  
       4. The fourth field is the count on the batter when this  
          particular event (play) occurred.  Most Retrosheet
          games do not have this information, and in such cases,
          "??" appears in this field. 
  
       5. The fifth field is of variable length and contains all  
          pitches to this batter in this plate appearance.  The  
          standard pitches are:  C for called strike, S for  
          swinging strike, B for ball, F for foul ball.  In  
          addition, pickoff throws are indicated by the number of 
          the base the throw went to.  For example, "1" means the 
          pitcher made a throw to first, "2" a throw to second,  
          etc.  If the base number is preceded by a "+" sign, the 
          pickoff throw was made by the catcher. Some of the less
          common pitch codes are L:foul bunt, M:missed bunt,
          Q:swinging strike on a pitchout, R:foul ball on a pitchout,
          I:intentional ball, P:pitchout, H:hit by pitch, K:strike of
          unknown type, U:unkown or missing pitch.  Most Retrosheet  
          games do not have pitch data and consequnetly this field  
          is blank for such games. 
  
          There is occasionally more than one event for each  
          plate appearance, such as stolen bases, wild pitches,  
          and balks in which the same batter remains at the  
          plate.  On these occasions the pitch sequence is  
          interrupted by a period, and there is another play  
          record for the resumption of the batter's plate  
          appearance.  
  
       6. The sixth field describes the play which occurred.   
          This field is variable in length and has three main  
          portions which follow the Retrosheet scoring  
          system.  The scoring procedure description also  
          contains a diagram that explains clearly how each area  
          of the playing field is designated.  (The diagram is
          available under Docs, but most Retrosheet game
          accounts do not contain detailed location codes.) 
  
            a. The first portion is a description of the basic  
               play, following standard baseball scoring  
               notation.  For example, a fly ball to center field 
               is "8", a ground ball to second is "43", etc.   
               Base hits are abbreviated with a letter (S for  
               singles, D for doubles, T for triples, H for home  
               runs) and (usually) a number identifying the  
               fielder who played the ball.  Therefore "S7" is a  
               single fielded by the left fielder.  
  
            b. The second portion is a modifier of the first part 
               and is separated from it with a forward slash,  
               "/".  In fact, there may be more than one second  
               portion.  Typical examples are hit locations.  For  
               example, "D8/78" indicates a double fielded by the 
               center fielder on a ball hit to left center.   
               Other possible second portion modifiers are "SH"  
               for sacrifice hits, GDP for grounding into double  
               plays, etc.  
  
            c. The third portion describes the advancement of any 
               runners, separated from the earlier parts by a  
               period.  For example, "S9/L9S.2-H;1-3"  should be  
               read as: single fielded by the right fielder, line 
               drive  to short right field.  The runner on 2nd 
               scored (advanced to home), and the runner on first 
               advanced to third.  Note that any advances after  
               the first are separated by semicolons.  
  
com  This record is used for those plays which require a special  
     comment to describe the event.  
  
sub  Whenever any change in the lineup occurs, there is a  
     substitute record.  There are five fields in this type of  
     record.  
  
       a. The first field is the Retrosheet ID code.  
  
       b. The second field is the player's name.  
  
       c. The third field is either 0 (visiting team) or 1 (home  
          team).  
  
       d. The fourth field is batting order position of the  
          substitute.  
  
       e. The fifth field is the position the substitute is going 
          to play.  Code "11" is for pinch hitters and "12" is  
          for pinch runners.  
  
     Note that whenever a substitution occurs, it is preceded by  
     a play record with the play event described as "NP", meaning 
     No Play.  The purpose of this record is to "mark the place"  
     of the substitution for other programs. 
  
data      The several data records appear after all plays from  
     the game and contain the number of earned runs allowed by  
     each pitcher.  Each record contains the pitcher's Project  
     Scoresheet code and the number of earned runs he allowed.  
  
  
There are three programs available for downloading under Tools
that facilitate your analysis of the raw play by play information.
These programs are  called BOX, BEVENT and BGAME.  Their
functions are described below. It is important to note that in order
to use these programs, you must have the TEAM file and the ROSTER
files in the directory with the program and the event files.  The
name of the TEAM file includes the year, TEAM1967 for example.
These files are included in the .zip archive files.
 
_________________________ 
  
BOX  
     The purpose of BOX is to generate newspaper (or Sporting  
News) style box scores from the event file.  It is designed so  
that you can print box scores of specific games or all games in  
an event file.  There are three specific ways in which BOX may be 
run, each of which involves invoking a different "switch".  All of
these programs must have the year specified after the -y switch on
the command line.  
 
  
  1. The simplest use of BOX is to print all the games in the  
     file.  For example, the file 1967NYA.EVA contains all the Yanks 
     home games.  To print a box score of all games in this file, 
     be sure your printer is on and ready and type:  
  
          BOX -y 1967 1967NYA.EVA>PRN  
  
     If you leave out the ">PRN" at the end of the command, then  
     all the box scores will be displayed on your monitor in a  
     continuous unreadable stream.  As an alternative you may  
     direct the output to a new file on your disk for later  
     examination.  In this example such a file might have the  
     name "Yanksbox".  In that case the command would be:  
  
          BOX -y 1967 67NYA.EVA>YANKSBOX  
  
  2. The second choice is to print a box score for a specific  
     game for which you know the GameID, for example, NYA6704140, 
     the game we considered above.  In this case, prepare your  
     printer and type:  
  
          BOX -y 1967 -i NYA6704140 67NYA.EVA>PRN  
  
     Note that you must specify both the GameID as well as the  
     name of the file which contains the game.
  
     When this -i switch is used, the BOX program searches the  
     entire event file from the start for the GameID you specify.  
     Depending on your equipment, this search may take many  
     seconds or even a few minutes.  After your requested game  
     has been printed, the BOX program will continue to search to 
     the end of the file, another potentially time-consuming  
     process.  
  
  3. The third choice for using BOX is important if you don't  
     remember a desired GameId.  In this option, the BOX program  
     searches through the file you specify, displays each GameID  
     on the screen for you, and asks if you want that game  
     printed.  You must respond yes or no for each game.  The  
     format of this command is:  
  
          BOX -y 1967 -q 67NYA.EVA>PRN  
  
It is important to note that in order to use BOX, you must have  
the TEAM file and the ROSTER files in the directory with the BOX  
program and the event files.  These files are included in the .zip  
archive.  
 
_________________________ 
There are two utility programs which will greatly facilitate your
analysis of the play-by-play data.  These programs are called
BEVENT and BGAME.  Instructions for using both of these programs are
contained in this file.

BEVENT, and BGAME have small help screens which can be displayed
by typing the program name followed by a space and the characters
"-h" at the DOS prompt.  These help screens are useful when you
cannot remember the correct syntax for each program or when you
want to quickly display the switch options available for each program.

Both of these utility programs must have the year specified after
the -y switch on the command line.  Sample syntax for use:

    BEVENT -y 1967 67BOS.EVA > 67BOS.BEV

In addition, these programs work with the standard DOS wildcards
"*" and "?" in the names of the input files.
  
BEVENT  
     The purpose of BEVENT is to prepare a report of a game in a format
that is suitable for importing into a data base or spreadsheet.  It
would be reasonable to think of BEVENT functioning as a parser to
extract information from the event file and report the game state
after each play.  BEVENT functions by converting each play of a game
into a record that contains several items of situational information
such as number of outs, score of game, identity of pitcher, handedness
of batter and pitcher, identity of any runners, etc., along with the play
results.  In order to run the BEVENT program, you must have the
"team" and the appropriate roster files in the same directory with
the BEVENT program and the event files.

There are more than 95 different fields which may be created for
each BEVENT record.  You have the ability to control which of these
fields is created.  The list of all possible fields may be obtained
by typing the command "BEVENT -d".  If you do not specify which
fields you want BEVENT to create, it will default to the fields
noted by the help screen (type "BEVENT -h").   These default fields
are also noted with an asterisk in the list generated by "BEVENT
-d".

There are several other switches which may be used with BEVENT,
To obtain a list of these options, enter the command "BEVENT -h".
The output of any BEVENT command may be directed to a printer or
to a new file.

Some BEVENT fields are numbers and some are strings (that is,
non-numeric characters).  In all cases, the strings are enclosed by
double quotes so that the records can be correctly interpreted as
numbers or strings when imported into spreadsheet and data base
programs.  Following are descriptions of each field. 


     game id.  Game ID following the format described in the
               "data.doc" file.

     event num.  All events are numbered consecutively throughout
                 each game for easy reference.

     inning.  Inning in which this play took place. 

     batting team.  A one-character identification of the team at
                    bat ("0" for the visiting team and "1" for the
                    home team).

     outs.  Number of outs before this play. 

     balls, strikes, pitch sequence.  These three consecutive
            fields present the pitch information for this play.

     vis score.  Number of runs for the visiting team before this
                 play.

     home score.  Number of runs for the home team before this
                  play.

     batter.  Player ID code for the batter.

     batter hand.  One character which describes how the batter
                   batted for this event (L or R).

     res batter and res batter hand.  These fields are almost
             always the same as batter and batter hand.  They
             only differ if the batter is replaced during the
             time at bat and the final event is charged to the
             previous batter.  For example, if a pinch-hitter is
             inserted with two strikes and then takes strike three,
             the strikeout is charged to the first batter (the
             responsible batter)

     pitcher.  Player ID code for the pitcher.

     pitcher hand.  The hand with which the pitcher throws (L or
                    R).

     res pitcher and res pitcher hand.  Counterparts to res batter
             and res batter hand for those occasions when a pitcher
             is changed during an at-bat and the first pitcher is
             charged with the result.  For example, if a relief
             pitcher enters with a three-ball, no-strike count and
             throws ball four, then the walk is charged to the first
             pitcher.

     positions.  The next eight fields contain the Player ID codes
             for the players at each of the eight fielding positions,
             in numerical sequence by position number.

     first runner, second runner, third runner.  These three
             consecutive fields contain the Player ID codes for the
             runner at each base.  If a base is not occupied, then the
             field has no width and there will be a pair of double
             quotes with no space between them.  For example, Bill
             Ripken on first as the only runner would look like this:

                "ripkb001","","",

             With Joe Orsulak on first and Cal Ripken on third, these
             fields would look like::

               "orsuj001","","ripkc001"

     event text.  The complete description of the play using the
             format described for the event files.

     leadoff flag.  A one character descriptor which is T for the
             first batter of each inning and F for all others.

     pinchhit flag.  Another one character flag which is T for
             pinch-hitters and F for all others.

     defensive position.  The defensive position currently being
             played by this batter.  It is pinch-hitter (position 11)
             for pinch-hitters.

     lineup position.  Position in the batting order for this
             batter.

     event type.  There are 25 different numeric codes to describe
             the type of event.  They are:

          Code Meaning

          0    Unknown event
          1    No event
          2    Generic out
          3    Strikeout
          4    Stolen base
          5    Defensive indifference
          6    Caught stealing
          7    Pickoff error
          8    Pickoff
          9    Wild pitch
          10   Passed ball
          11   Balk
          12   Other advance
          13   Foul error
          14   Walk
          15   Intentional walk
          16   Hit by pitch
          17   Interference
          18   Error
          19   Fielder's choice
          20   Single
          21   Double
          22   Triple
          23   Home run
          24   Missing play


     batter event flag.  A one character indication of whether or
             not the event terminated the batter's appearance.
             T = yes, which is most common; F = no, meaning the
             same batter stayed at the plate, such as after a stolen base.

     ab flag.  A one character indication of whether batter was
             charged with at-bat (T = yes, F = no).

     hit value.  One number indicating value of hit (0 = no hit;
             1 = single; 2 = double; 3 = triple; 4 = home run).

     SH flag.  One character indicating sacrifice hit (T = yes;
             F = no).

     SF flag.  One character indicating sacrifice fly (T = yes;
             F = no).

     outs on play.  Number of outs recorded on this play.  

     double play flag.  One character field of DP or not. 

     triple play flag.  Once character field of TP or not. 

     RBI on play.  Number of RBI credited to batter on this play. 

     wild pitch flag, passed ball flag.  Two records with
             indication of whether there was a WP or PB on this play.

     fielded by.  Identity of the fielder who played the ball. 
             This is especially important for base hits when no
             formal fielding credit is given.

     batted ball type.  Descriptor which is either F (fly ball), L
             (line drive), P (pop-up), or G (ground ball).

     bunt flag.  Descriptor for whether or not play was a bunt. 

     foul flag.  Descriptor for whether or not ball was played in
             foul ground.

     hit location.  The zone on the field where the ball was hit. 
             Refer to the Scoring System attachments for a
             diagram of all locations.

     num errors.  Number of errors on this play (a maximum of three
             is allowed).

     error players and types.  These are 6 consecutive fields which
             identify the player committing the 1st, 2nd or 3rd errors
             on the play and the type of error each was (throw or drop).

     batter dest.  The base which the batter reached at the
             conclusion of the play.  If he was out, the base is 0.

     runner dest.  The next three fields contain the base reached
             by each of the three runners at the conclusion of the
             play.  If there was no advance, then the base shown
             will be the one where the runner started.  Note that
             these runner fields are not updated on plays which end
             an inning, even if the inning-ending play would have
             resulted in an advance of one or more runners had it
             occurred earlier in the inning.

     plays.  The next four fields indicate the play (if any) made
             on the batter and each of the runners (if any).

     SB, CS, PO flags.  The next nine fields contain single
             character descriptors for each of the runners indicating
             whether he had a stolen base, was caught stealing or was
             picked off.

     responsible pitcher for runner.  The next three fields
             indicate which pitcher was responsible for the runners on each
             base, if any.  This assignment reflects responsbility should
             the runner score.

     new game and end game flags.  The next two fields set a flag
             if this is the first record of a new game or the last
             record of the game.

     pinchrunners.  The next three fields indicate if a pinchrunner
             has entered the game and at which base.

     removed runners.  The next three fields contain the player ID
             of the runner who was just run for, one field for each
             base.  If there is no pinchrunner at that base, the
             field contains the NULL string "".

     removed batter.  If there is a pinchhitter, this field
             contains the player ID of the batter removed.

     If there is no pinchhitter, this field contains the NULL
             string "".

     removed batter position.  If there is a pinchhitter, this
             field contains the fielding position of the removed batter.
             If there is no pinchhitter, this value is 0.

     fielder putouts.  The next three fields indicate the first,
             second, and third fielders credited with putouts on the play.

     fielder assists.  The next five fields indicate which fielders
             got credited with assists on the play (maximum of five
             fielders).


If you run BEVENT and generate all the possible fields, the output
will be more than three times the size of the event file you
specified to the program.  It is strongly suggested that you
generate only a subset of all possible fields at any single time,
since most studies will not need all of the information at one
time.  BEVENT may then be run again, specifying different fields
for the output for a subsequent study. 


The following list presents all of the above options with the numbers to use
with the -f option to specify them.  Those marked with an asterisk are produced
by the default option when the user specifies no fields.

number    field
------    -----
0    game id*
1    visiting team*
2    inning*
3    batting team*
4    outs*
5    balls*
6    strikes*
7    pitch sequence
8    vis score*
9    home score*
10   batter
11   batter hand
12   res batter*
13   res batter hand*
14   pitcher
15   pitcher hand
16   res pitcher*
17   res pitcher hand*
18   catcher
19   first base
20   second base
21   third base
22   shortstop
23   left field
24   center field
25   right field
26   first runner*
27   second runner*
28   third runner*
29   event text*
30   leadoff flag*
31   pinchhit flag*
32   defensive position*
33   lineup position*
34   event type*
35   batter event flag*
36   ab flag*
37   hit value*
38   SH flag*
39   SF flag*
40   outs on play*
41   double play flag
42   triple play flag
43   RBI on play*
44   wild pitch flag*
45   passed ball flag*
46   fielded by
47   batted ball type
48   bunt flag
49   foul flag
50   hit location
51   num errors*
52   1st error player
53   1st error type
54   2nd error player
55   2nd error type
56   3rd error player
57   3rd error type
58   batter dest* (5 if scores and unearned, 6 if team unearned)
59   runner on 1st dest* (5 if scores and unearned, 6 if team unearned)
60   runner on 2nd dest* (5 if scores and unearned, 6 if team unearned)
61   runner on 3rd dest* (5 if socres and uneanred, 6 if team unearned)
62   play on batter
63   play on runner on 1st
64   play on runner on 2nd
65   play on runner on 3rd
66   SB for runner on 1st flag
67   SB for runner on 2nd flag
68   SB for runner on 3rd flag
69   CS for runner on 1st flag
70   CS for runner on 2nd flag
71   CS for runner on 3rd flag
72   PO for runner on 1st flag
73   PO for runner on 2nd flag
74   PO for runner on 3rd flag
75   Responsible pitcher for runner on 1st
76   Responsible pitcher for runner on 2nd
77   Responsible pitcher for runner on 3rd
78   New Game Flag
79   End Game Flag
80   Pinch-runner on 1st
81   Pinch-runner on 2nd
82   Pinch-runner on 3rd
83   Runner removed for pinch-runner on 1st
84   Runner removed for pinch-runner on 2nd
85   Runner removed for pinch-runner on 3rd
86   Batter removed for pinch-hitter
87   Position of batter removed for pinch-hitter
88   Fielder with First Putout (0 if none)
89   Fielder with Second Putout (0 if none)
90   Fielder with Third Putout (0 if none)
91   Fielder with First Assist (0 if none)
92   Fielder with Second Assist (0 if none)
93   Fielder with Third Assist (0 if none)
94   Fielder with Fourth Assist (0 if none)
95   Fielder with Fifth Assist (0 if none)
96   event num

  
***IMPORTANT:    If you run BEVENT and generate all the possible 
fields, the output will be more than three times the size of the 
event file you specified to the program.  It is suggested that 
you generate only a subset of all possible fields at any single 
time, since most studies will not need all of the information at 
one time.  BEVENT may then be run again, specifying different 
fields for the output, for a subsequent study. 
 
_________________________ 
 
BGAME 
  
The purpose of this program is to generate a summary of those items
which are constant for each game, such as date, indication of day
or night, identity of umpires, etc.  There is also summary data of
the game, such as the final score.  

The output of BGAME may be coordinated with that from BEVENT since
they use the same Game ID code.  The use of this program is similar
to BEVENT in that there are several switches to create the precise
output desired.  To see the options enter the command "BGAME -h";
for more general instructions on how to use BGAME to analyze
play-by-play data, see the instructions for BEVENT.

The following list presents all of the options for BGAME with their numerical
identification.  Note that the default for BGAME is that all fields are
produced.  The -f option similar to that in BEVENT can be used to output
selected fields.

number    field
------    -----
0	game id
1	date
2	game number (0 = no double header)
3	day of week
4	start time
5	DH used flag
6	day/night flag
7	visiting team
8	home team
9	game site
10	vis. starting pitcher
11	home starting pitcher
12	home plate umpire
13	first base umpire
14	second base umpire
15	third base umpire
16	left field umpire
17	right field umpire
18	attendance
19	PS scorer
20	translator
21	inputter
22	input time
23	edit time
24	how scored
25	pitches entered?
26	temperature
27	wind direction
28	wind speed
29	field condition
30	precipitation
31	sky
32	time of game
33	number of innings
34	visitor final score
35	home final score
36	visitor hits
37	home hits
38	visitor errors
39	home errors
40	visitor left on base
41	home left on base
42	winning pitcher
43	losing pitcher
44	save for
45	GW RBI
46	visitor batter 1
47	visitor position 1
48	visitor batter 2
49	visitor position 2
50	visitor batter 3
51	visitor position 3
52	visitor batter 4
53	visitor position 4
54	visitor batter 5
55	visitor position 5
56	visitor batter 6
57	visitor position 6
58	visitor batter 7
59	visitor position 7
60	visitor batter 8
61	visitor position 8
62	visitor batter 9
63	visitor position 9
64	home batter 1
65	home position 1
66	home batter 2
67	home position 2
68	home batter 3
69	home position 3
70	home batter 4
71	home position 4
72	home batter 5
73	home position 5
74	home batter 6
75	home position 6
76	home batter 7
77	home position 7
78	home batter 8
79	home position 8
80	home batter 9
81	home position 9
